---
label: Cat. 3
title: Pair of Tureens, Liners, and Stands (*paire de terrines, avec leurs doublures, et plateaux*)
short_title: Pair of Tureens
type: entry
weight: 103
class: side-by-side
object:
  - id: 3
---

## 82.DG.12.1.a-c

Object (liner, tureen, stand): 8620 g (277 ozt. 2.788 dwt.)

### Liner 82.DG.12.1.a

1728-29

Object: H: 12.3 × W: 31.9 × D: 20.7 cm, 906.69 g (4 13/16 × 12 9/16 × 8 1/8 in., 27 ozt. 3.003 dwt.)

#### Marks

Struck with the following stamps: a crowned "M" (the Paris warden's mark used between August 12, 1728, and August 26, 1729) (mark 3.1); an "A" with a crown at its side (the Paris charge mark for works of silver used between December 1, 1726, and October 15, 1732, under the fermiers Jacques Cottin and Louis Gervais) (mark 3.2); a crowned chancellor's mace (the Paris discharge mark for small works used between December 1, 1726, and October 15, 1732, under the fermiers Jacques Cottin and Louis Gervais) (mark 3.3).

\[mark 3.1 - OTMM gm_006586D4V1.TIF (“M”) \]

\[mark 3.2 - OTMM gm_006586D6V1.TIF (“A”) \]

\[mark 3.3 – OTMM gm_006586D8V1.TIF (mace)\]

#### Mark Locations

Underneath: a crowned "M" and an "A" with a crown at its side. On exterior, above the armorial: a crowned chancellor's mace.

#### Inscriptions

Inscribed Roman numerals "DU - N° - II" on the exterior side (opposite the side with the armorial) (inscription 3.1) and "II" on the interior (inscription 3.2).

\[inscription 3.1- OTMM gm_006586D1V1.TIF (DU - N° - II)\]

\[inscription 3.2 - OTMM gm_006586D2V1.TIF ("II") \]

#### Armorial

Engraved with the coat of arms of the Melo e Castro family, above crossed palm branches and surmounted by a Portuguese ducal coronet and the family crest of an eagle with spread wings (armorial 3.1).[^1]

\[armorial 3.1 - OTMM gm_006586D3V1.TIF (armorial)\]

### Tureen 82.DG.12.1.b

1726

Object: H: 17.1 × W: 46.7 × D: 25.7 cm, 4480 g (6 3/4 × 18 3/8 × 10 1/8 in., 144 ozt. 0.706 dwt.)

#### Marks

Struck with the following stamps: three indecipherable marks, one possibly the maker’s mark (mark 3.4);[^2] a crowned "K" (the Paris warden's mark used between August 13, 1726, and August 13, 1727) (mark 3.5); and a crowned "A" overlaid with crossed "L's" (the Paris charge mark for works of silver used between February 15, 1722, and December 1, 1726, under the fermier Charles Cordier) (mark 3.6); and a partially struck caduceus (the Paris discharge mark for works of medium size used between February 15, 1722, and December 1, 1726, under the fermier Charles Cordier).

\[mark 3.4 – x-radiograph (annotated to indicate locations of three indecipherable marks) \]

\[mark 3.5 - OTMM gm_006587D6V1.TIF (“K”) \]

\[mark 3.6 - OTMM gm_006587D8V1.TIF (“A”) \]

#### Mark Locations

Underneath: three obliterated marks, a crowned "K", and an "A" overlaid with crossed "L's".

On the exterior of the rim: a caduceus (partially struck).

#### Inscriptions

Inscribed with the Roman numeral "II" on interior, below rim (inscription 3.3), and in the interior bottom with the numeral and weight "N° 2 - 48 m - 3 on. 2 g" (inscription 3.4).[^3]

\[inscription 3.3 - OTMM gm_006587D12V1.TIF ("II") \]

\[inscription 3.4 - OTMM gm_006587D10V1.TIF (“N° 2 - 48 m - 3 on. 2 g”) \]

#### Armorials

Applied on each side with a cartouche chased and engraved with the coat of arms of the Melo e Castro family, above crossed palm branches and surmounted by a Portuguese ducal coronet.

### Stand 82.DG.12.1.c

1728-29

Object: H: 3.5 × W: 56.7 × D: 40.6 cm, 3230 g (1 3/8 × 22 5/16 × 16 in., 103 ozt. 16.938 dwt)

#### Marks

Struck with the following stamps: an indecipherable mark, probably a crowned "M" (the Paris warden's mark used between August 12, 1728, and August 26, 1729) (mark 3.4); an "A" with a crown at its side (the Paris charge mark for works of silver used between December 1, 1726, and October 15, 1732, under the fermiers Jacques Cottin and Louis Gervais) (mark 3.5); and an artichoke mark (the Paris mark for large, old works in silver to which new parts have been added, used between October 1, 1762, and October 1, 1768, under the fermier Jean-Jacques Prévost) (mark 3.6).

\[mark 3.4 - OTMM gm_006588D6V1.TIF (probably a crowned "M")\]

\[mark 3.5 - OTMM gm_006588D8V1.TIF (“A” – rotate 180°) \]

\[mark 3.6 - OTMM gm_006588D10V1.TIF (artichoke) \]

#### Mark Locations

Underneath: an indecipherable mark, probably a crowned "M", an "A" with a crown at its side, and an artichoke.

#### Inscriptions

Engraved underneath "FAIT.PAR.F.T.GERMAIN.ORF.SCULP.DU.ROY.AUX GALLERIES.DU LOUVRE.APARIS" (MADE.BY.F.T.GERMAIN.SCULPTOR.SILVERSMITH.OF THE.KING.AT THE GALLERIES. OF THE LOUVRE.IN PARIS) with the numeral and weight "n°. 1 .48 ^m^ . 1 ^o^ " (inscription 3.5) and inscribed with the Roman numeral "DU- N - I".[^4]

\[inscription 3.5 - OTMM gm_006588D2V1.TIF (long signature + weight)\]

#### Armorials

Face of stand engraved with the coat of arms of the Melo e Castro family, above crossed palm branches, flanked by husk festoons, and surmounted by a Portuguese ducal coronet and the family crest of an eagle with spread wings, all within tied laurel branches.

## 82.DG.12.2.a-c

Object (liner, tureen, stand): 8720 g (280 ozt. 7.09 dwt.)

### Liner 82.DG.12.2.a

1728-29

Object: H: 12.3 × W: 31.5 × D: 21 cm, 1024.97 g (4 13/16 × 12 3/8 × 8 1/4 in., 32 ozt. 19.071 dwt.)

#### Marks

Struck with the following stamps: a crowned "M" (the Paris warden's mark used between August 12, 1728, and August 26, 1729) (mark 3.7); an "A" with a crown at its side (the Paris charge mark for works of silver used between December 1, 1726, and October 15, 1732, under the fermiers Jacques Cottin and Louis Gervais) (mark 3.8); and a crowned chancellor's mace (the Paris discharge mark for small works used between December 1, 1726, and October 15, 1732, under the fermiers Jacques Cottin and Louis Gervais) (mark 3.9).

\[mark 3.7 - OTMM gm_006589D4V1.TIF (“M”)\]

\[mark 3.8 - OTMM gm_006589D6V1.TIF (“A”) \]

\[mark 3.9 - OTMM gm_006589D8V1.TIF (mace) \]

#### Mark Locations

Underneath: a crowned "M" and an "A" with a crown at its side. On exterior, above the Roman numeral "- DU - N° - I" inscription: a crowned chancellor's mace.

#### Inscriptions

Inscribed with the Roman numerals "- DU - N° - I" on the exterior (opposite the side with the armorial) (inscription 3.6) and "I" on the interior (inscription 3.7).

\[inscription 3.6 - OTMM gm_006589D1V1.TIF ("- DU - N° - I") \]

\[inscription 3.7 - OTMM gm_006589D2V1.TIF ("I")\]

#### Armorials

Engraved with the coat of arms of the Melo e Castro family, above crossed palm branches surmounted by a Portuguese ducal coronet and the family crest of an eagle with spread wings.

### Tureen 82.DG.12.2.b

1726

Object: H: 17.5 × W: 47 × D: 26 cm, 4370 g (6 7/8 × 18 1/2 × 10 1/4 in., 140 ozt. 9.976 dwt.)

#### Marks

Struck with the following stamps: a crowned "K" (the Paris warden's mark used between August 13, 1726, and August 13, 1727) (mark 3.10); and a crowned "A" overlaid with crossed "L's" (the Paris charge mark for works of silver used between February 15, 1722, and December 1, 1726, under the fermier Charles Cordier) (mark 3.11).

\[mark 3.10 - OTMM gm_006590D5V1.TIF (“K”) \]

\[mark 3.11 - OTMM gm_006590D7V1.TIF (“A”)\]

#### Mark Locations

Underneath: a crowned "K", and an "A" overlaid with crossed "L's"

#### Inscriptions

Inscribed "I" on interior, below rim (inscription 3.8), and in the interior bottom with the numeral and weight "N° 1 . 48 m - 1 on. - 2 g -" (inscription 3.9).[^5]

\[inscription 3.8 - OTMM gm_006590D11V1.TIF (“I”) \]

\[inscription 3.9 - OTMM gm_006590D9V1.TIF (“N° 1 - 48 m - 1 on. 2 g”) \]

#### Armorials

Applied on each side with a cartouche chased and engraved with the coat of arms of the Melo e Castro family, above crossed palm branches and surmounted by a Portuguese ducal coronet (see alt plate 3e).

### Stand 82.DG.12.2.c

1728-29

Object: H: 3.7 × W: 57 × D: 40.6 cm, 3320 g (1 7/16 × 22 7/16 × 16 in., 106 ozt. 14.810 dwt.)

#### Marks

Struck with the following stamps: a crowned "M" (the Paris warden's mark used between August 12, 1728, and August 26, 1729) (mark 3.12); an "A" with a crown at its side (the Paris charge mark for works of silver used between December 1, 1726, and October 15, 1732, under the fermiers Jacques Cottin and Louis Gervais) (mark 3.13); and an artichoke mark (the Paris mark for large, old works in silver to which new parts have been added, used between October 1, 1762, and October 1, 1768, under the fermier Jean-Jacques Prévost) (mark 3.14).

\[mark 3.12 - OTMM gm_006591D10V1.TIF (“M”)\]

\[mark 3.13 - OTMM gm_006591D12V1.TIF (“A”)\]

\[mark 3.14 - OTMM gm_006591D14V1.TIF (artichoke)\]

#### Mark Locations

Underneath: a crowned "M", and an "A" with a crown at its side, and an artichoke.

#### Inscriptions

Engraved underneath "FAIT.PAR.F.T.GERMAIN.ORF.SCULP.DU.ROY.AUX GALLERIES.DU LOUVRE.APARIS. 1764" (MADE.BY.F.T.GERMAIN.SCULPTOR.SILVERSMITH.OF THE.KING.AT THE GALLERIES. OF THE LOUVRE.IN PARIS) and inscribed with the numeral and weight "n°. 2. 48\[m.\]5\[o\]" (alt plate 3a).[^6]

\[alt plate 3a - OTMM gm_006591D2V1.TIF (long signature, date, and weight)\]

#### Armorials

Face of stand engraved with the coat of arms of the Melo e Castro family, above crossed palm branches, flanked by a leafy garland, and surmounted by a Portuguese ducal coronet and the family crest of an eagle with spread wings, all within tied laurel branches (armorial 3.2).

\[armorial 3.2 – OTMM gm_006588D1V1.TIF (stand armorial)\]

## Object Description

This pair of oval tureens, with liners and stands, is characterized by its distinctive boar heads and hooves (alt plate 3b).

\[alternate plate 3b OTMM gm_007017F1V1.TIF - .1 tureen on stand (full, from slightly above)\]

Improvements in technical x-radiographic imaging enable a better understanding of the creation of these complex tureens.[^7] Each tureen has a slightly bulging convex lower body that rises into a concave curve before reaching the rim with its banded reed molding.[^8] The body has four supports positioned at the cardinal points. The sculptural ornament is symmetrical and was composed of cast parts attached to the body with pins and solder (alt plate 3c). A highly naturalistic boar head, nearly in the round, projects from the narrow ends of each tureen, with upper and lower tusks flaring out the open jaw and around the snout (alt plate 3d).[^9] The top of the head and ears rise above the rim. Coarse hair bristles from cheek to chest, which merges into the vessel’s body, and continues down the creature’s leg to its cloven hoof, which becomes one of the vessel’s supports (alt plate 3e). The bottom of the vessel is chased with coarsely-textured hair in an abstracted imitation of a boar’s belly (a feature that can be readily observed when the tureen rests on the reflective surface of the stand). Burnished scrolls separate the animal’s form from the vessel’s plain lower body. A substantial volute supports the vessel at the center of each long side. Adorned with imbricated dimpled discs on its front, it rises up the swelling body to bear an armorial cartouche. The oval shield carries the arms of the Portuguese family, Melo e Castro, beneath a Portuguese ducal coronet (alt plate 3f).[^10] Applied husk festoons and meandering ribbons spread laterally. The liner of each tureen snugly fits into the well of the vessel. Its plain surface rises to meet the back of the boar’s head. There, the rim of liner extends upward into a burnished scroll, amidst which are chased tufts of boar hair. Below, in low relief, a stylized half-shell motif adorns the interior of the liner.

\[alt plate 3c composite x-radiograph, tureen 82.DG.12.1.b\]

\[alt plate 3d OTMM gm_006587D3V1.TIF .1.b detail of boar head (profile) \]

\[alt plate 3e OTMM gm_006587F7V1.TIF - .1.b tureen with liner (side view)\]

\[alt plate 3f OTMM gm_006590D1V1.TIF - .2.b (armorial)\]

The shaped oval stand has a banded reed molding along its rim. Symmetrical curving scrolls and foliates articulate the cardinal points of its rim, each marked by either an oval, radiated disc or a quatrefoil clasp. A flat chased border follows the inner contour of the trim. It contains chased branches of berried laurel and irregularly-shaped gadrooned segments. The plain central surface of the stand is engraved with the coat of arms of the Melo e Castro family, above crossed palm branches, flanked by a husk festoons, and surmounted by a Portuguese ducal coronet and the family crest of an eagle with spread wings, all within tied laurel branches (see plate 3.1).

## Commentary

Traditionally, at the highest end of design and execution, centerpieces (*surtouts du table*), tureens (oval *terrines* and round *pots à oille*), condiment vessels for salt, pepper, mustard (*salière, poivrière, moutardier*), candlesticks (*flambeaux*) and candelabra (*candélabres* or *girandoles*) were the most sculptural vessels presented on the dining table or sideboard buffet for they were works in the round. Their fabrication required sophisticated skills beyond those needed to make the shallower forms of trays, salvers, dishes, bowls, and cutlery. As an experienced sculptor, bronze castor, and goldsmith, Thomas Germain excelled in creating astonishing and inventive three-dimensional table wares whose forms and ornament played upon the allied themes of food procurement and cookery: hunting, fishing, vegetable gardening, fruit cultivation, and mushroom picking. The fame of his talent grew after his appointment as goldsmith-sculptor to the king (*orfèvre-sculpteur du roi*) in September 1723. Made in 1726-29, this pair of tureens, with boar heads, is his earliest extant commission in a public collection alluding to the hunt and its catch of game.

Originally, these tureens had lids elaborately formed as sculptural still life tableaux of game and vegetables. These disappeared in the early nineteenth century but their weight can be calculated to approximately 3066 and 3227 grams respectively, which is consistent with an elaborate assembly of raised and cast elements.[^11] Essential elements of their ornament were recorded in two inventory descriptions from the eighteenth century (see below). They bore trophies of animals, birds, and crustaceans, with a cauliflower on one and an artichoke on the other (as discussed below). Their ornament of game, shellfish, and foodstuffs evoked the possible ingredients that would have been contained in the vessel.[^12] The French term for this shape of vessel was *terrine*, a type traditionally used to serve a slow-simmered pungent stew, or ragout. The recipe was hearty, calling for meat, vegetables, and seasonings. Normally, such vessels and their lids had clearly-defined handles to facilitate serving but these examples do not.[^13]

In his seminal article of 1990, Bruno Pons first identified this pair of tureens as that delivered by Thomas Germain to Samuel Jacques Bernard, future comte de Coubert, at his Parisian townhouse, located at 46 rue du Bac, on the left bank of the Seine just south of the Galeries du Louvre where Germain lived.[^14] Eldest son of the vastly wealthy banker Samuel Bernard, Samuel Jacques pursued a career in law with the Parlement de Paris before acquiring in 1725 the post of financial superintendent of the queen’s household (*surintendant des finances de la Maison de la Reine*). Perhaps arriving at this elevated position prompted him to order new silver vessels from the same court goldsmith-sculptor who in 1726, supplied a large gold toilette service of thirty-five pieces to his patroness, Marie Leczinska, queen of France.[^15] Date marks on the boar head tureens correspond to the years 1726-29 and support this hypothesis.

When delivered in 1729, the tureens had remarkable lids whose ornament complemented the boar heads on the vessels. The inventory compiled on August 13, 1753 following the death of Samuel Jacques Bernard, described them as:

> Silver Plate. N^o^ 802: Two large tureens supported by wild boars. On the covers are different animals and fruits. Two large oval dishes with chased contours serve \[as stands\] for the tureens. Two large spoons for these.[^16]

The 1796 posthumous inventory of their subsequent owner, Martinho de Melo e Castro gave further details about the tureens with boar heads (*cabeças de javalis*). Their lids were topped with an artichoke on one of them, and on the other a cauliflower, and both were decorated with birds, seafood and crayfish.[^17]

In subject, the game theme of Samuel Jacques Bernard’s tureens coincided with this father’s own passion for the hunt as expressed by the elder Bernard’s parallel commission to the Germain workshop for an ambitious and astounding table centerpiece in silver. Though not yet completed by the death of Samuel Bernard in 1739 nor by the death Thomas Germain himself in 1748, its final composition was achieved by his son, Francois Thomas Germain. The massive piece consisted of a stand, a tiered tray set with two greyhounds, furling foliage, a hunting horn, and dead game all rising to support a covered urn whose lid bore three putti, cavorting with stars, and two twiggy branches that transformed into candelabra (stars and greyhounds, or *levrettes*, were heraldic symbols of the comtes de Coubert). This tour-de-force never graced the Bernard household as payment remained outstanding upon the death of Samuel Jacques in 1753 and so it remained in the Germain workshop.[^18] In 1757, François Thomas Germain finished and sold the piece to a Portuguese client, the eighth duque d’Aveiro, who was forced to relinquish it to his king, José I (fig. 3.1).[^19]

\[fig. 3.1 – centerpiece for a table, Museu Nacional de Arte Antiga, inv 1827 Our\]

The over-arching theme of the hunt played into a major plan to aggrandize Samuel Jacques Bernard’s residence in the rue de Bac. That plan ultimately provided a harmonious context for his growing collection of silver table wares in general and the boar head tureens and their lids in particular. Having purchased an adjoining townhouse on the rue Saint-Dominique, Samuel Jacques initiated a project in 1730 to join it to his existing residence and, in so doing, create a new grand salon and gallery off the garden. The new salon was intended to also serve as a dining room; it was fitted with fine paneling (carved with allegorical figures), large mirrors, and two large still-life paintings by Jean-Baptiste Oudry of outdoor scenes with hunting dogs, water fowl, and exotic birds.[^20] The subjects of Oudry’s paintings complemented the ornament of Germain’s tureens.[^21]

Once the decoration of the grand salon was fully achieved around 1740-42, Bernard commissioned more serving vessels from Thomas Germain. This time he ordered a pair of round tureens (*pots à oille*), whose lids bore crayfish and artichokes in allusion to the ingredients of the Spanish recipe for *olio*.[^22] When laid for the first course, the Bernard dining table must have resembled the engraved arrangement titled *Table de quinze ou seize Couverts* (“Table of fifteen or sixteen Place Settings”) that accompanied the 1742 French edition of the cookbook, *Le cuisinier moderne*, by Vincent La Chapelle.[^23] This two-dimensional rendering clearly distinguished the sculptural forms of the *terrines* and *pots à oille* from the shallower dishes and plates. The absence of a centerpiece (*surtout de table*) in this engraving is striking, the more so since Bernard’s own dining table lacked the centerpiece commissioned by his father from Germain (as it wasn’t be finished until after the deaths of both father and son) (fig. 3.2).

\[fig. 3.2 – engraving, The Schlesinger Library, Radcliffe Institute, Harvard University, Cambridge, inv. 641.64 L13c v.6\]

Thomas Germain made a nearly identical second pair of boar head tureens in 1733-34 that passed through the collections of the comte d’Eu, the duc de Penthièvre, and Henry Janssen, a naturalized Englishman living in Paris.[^24] They survive with their lids; one is in the Detroit Institute of Arts and the other in a private collection. The lid of the former bears a rabbit, a crayfish, oysters on the half-shell, artichokes, leafy greens, and a mushroom (fig. 3.3). The lid of the latter has a snipe, a cauliflower, an onion, an open pea pod, a turnip, and mushrooms. Their appearance gives the closest possible visualization of the lids lost from the Getty pair. One notable distinction, however, concerns the boar leg supports on the Janssen tureens; each support consists of two boar legs and hooves, paired side-by-side. In this regard, they differ from the Bernard/Getty versions, whose supports each have only one boar leg and hoof. Paired boar leg supports are clearly visible in the still life of a boar head tureen, filled with peaches, painted about 1739-40 by François Desportes, a neighbor of the Germain family in the Galeries du Louvre (fig. 3.4). The painting was brought from Paris to Stockholm around 1739-41 by the Swedish diplomat and art collector, Carl Gustav Tessin.[^25]

\[fig. 3.3 – lidded tureen, Detroit Institute of Arts acc. no. 59.18\]

\[fig. 3.4 – painting, Nationalmuseum, Stockholm, inv. MN 800\]

Sometime after the death of Samuel Jacques Bernard in 1753 and the protracted settlement of his estate which had outstanding debts, François Thomas Germain acquired the Bernard pairs of boar head tureens and *pots à oille*. He, in turn, sold both pairs in 1764 to [Martinho de Melo e Castro](https://www.getty.edu/art/collection/search/?provenance.id=23371), changing their armorials accordingly and engraving his signature on the stands (see inscription 3.3, alt plates 3a and 3e).[^26] Melo e Castro was the Portuguese representative at the peace negotiations to end the Seven Years War. The first phrase of negotiations was held in Fontainebleau in 1762 and the second phase in Paris in 1763. Coincidentally, while in Paris for a few months in 1761, Melo e Castro resided in the Hôtel Bernard, 46 rue du Bac, as had his predecessor in the proceedings, the Portuguese abbot Salema.[^27] Melo e Castro bought the tureens and other silver to grace his table as befitting his stature as the Portuguese ambassador to France. The tureens remained in his possession until the end of his life and were listed in his posthumous inventory of September 14, 1796.[^28]

In terms of design and execution, drawings and documents shed light on Thomas Germain’s inventive creation of the boar head tureen model. Peter Fuhring analyzed his extant working drawings for tureens, to reveal his design process. [^29] Aspects of one design in particular, dated to ca. 1725-30, evolved and took on three-dimensional form. The vessel in the sanguine drawing has a cow’s head under each handle. The chest, leg, and hoof of each merge to become the lateral supports for the tureen, in a manner analogous to the boar version. Moreover, the central support of the drawn vessel parallels those on the actual Bernard/Getty tureens, in that the drawn volute support, adorned with imbricated fleurons, rises up to carry the armorial shield. Another drawing attributed to Thomas Germain workshop shows designs for ten table wares arranged on a single sheet.[^30] It is a working drawing, of pen and wash, with linear markings at the bottom left corner to indicate the incremental measurement of twelve *pouces* (equivalent to 32.4cm / 12 3/4 in.). Each vessel’s relevant measurements are also indicted, with the exception of the most detailed of the renderings. That portrays a lidded boar head tureen very much like the Jenssen version of 1733-34. Meanwhile, the inventory of François Thomas Germain’s premises taken in May-June 1765 lists models in lead from which the tureens were made for *M\[onsieur\] de Janssin* \[sic\]. Clearly the models dated to the era of his father and had remained in the workshop after his death in 1748. Given the close similarity of the 1733-34 Janssen tureens to the 1726-29 Bernard versions, it is probable some of these models were originally created for the earlier commission: “4 boar feet, 2 boar head, 1 end knot and lid, 1 handle \[knot\] at back of the liner, the bundle of herbs on top of the lid and among the vegetables.” Lastly, among the models listed for coats of arms, monograms, and escutcheons there was a lead “group of branches and palms and an eagle, attributes of the arms Mello” which were created in 1764 on the occasion when Martinho Melo e Castro purchased both the *terrines* and the *pots à oille*.[^31]

## Provenance

1729-53: [Samuel Jacques Bernard, comte de Coubert](https://www.getty.edu/art/collection/search/?provenance.id=16521), French, 1686-1753 (in the salle à manger of his hôtel, 46 rue du Bac, Paris, France); by 1764: [François Thomas Germain](https://www.getty.edu/art/collection/search/?provenance.id=843), French, 1726-1791, when the Melo e Castro coats of arms were applied; 1764-95: [Martinho de Melo e Castro](https://www.getty.edu/art/collection/search/?provenance.id=23371), Portuguese, 1716-1795, secretary of state to king José I (reigned 1750-1777), Portuguese representative at the peace negotiations to end the Seven Years War held in Paris 1763 (and, who temporarily resided at the Hôtel Bernard, 46 rue du Bac, in 1761), by inheritance to his nephew, Dom Francisco de Almeida de Melo e Castro; 1795-1819: d[om Francisco de Almeida de Melo e Castro, sixth conde das Galveias](https://www.getty.edu/art/collection/search/?provenance.id=39915), Portuguese, 1758-1819, by inheritance to his son, dom António Francisco Lobo Almeida de Melo e Castro de Saldanha e Beja;[^32] 1819-71: d[om António Francisco Lobo Almeida de Melo e Castro de Saldanha e Beja, seventh conde das Galveias](https://www.getty.edu/art/collection/search/?provenance.id=39918), Portuguese, 1795-1871, by inheritance to his son, dom Francisco Xavier Lobo de Almeida de Melo e Castro; 1871-92: [dom Francisco Xavier Lobo de Almeida de Melo e Castro, eighth conde das Galveias](https://www.getty.edu/art/collection/search/?provenance.id=39921), Portuguese, 1824-1892, by inheritance within the family to his half-sister, Thereza Lobo de Almeida de Melo e Castro de Vilhena (Galveias); by 1934-56 [dona Teresa Lobo de Almeida de Melo e Castro de Vilhena (Galveias)](https://www.getty.edu/art/collection/search/?provenance.id=39971), Portuguese, 1864-1956, by inheritance within the family to dom José Lobo de Almeida Melo e Castro; -1975: [dom José Lobo de Almeida Melo e Castro, eleventh Conde das Galveias](https://www.getty.edu/art/collection/search/?provenance.id=39927), Portuguese, 1923-1998 (Cascais, Lisbon, Portugal) \[sold, Christie’s, Geneva. November 11, 1975, 74-75, lot 230 A and B to Jean Rossignol\];[^33] 1975-82: [Jean Rossignol](https://www.getty.edu/art/collection/search/?provenance.id=11503) (Geneva, Switzerland), sold to the J. Paul Getty Museum, 1982.

## Exhibition History

*Exposição de Arte Francesa, Especialmente de Ourivesaria do Século XVIII*, Museu Nacional de Arte Antiga (Lisbon) May-June 1934 (nos. 230-231, lent by Ex.ma Sr.a D. Thereza Lobo de Almeida de Melo e Castro de Vilhena).

*Les trésors de l'orfèvrerie du Portugal*, Musée des Arts décoratifs (Paris) November 1954-January 1955 (no. 453, lent by Mme. T. de Melo de Castro de Vilhena \[Galveias\]).

*Casting Nature: François Thomas Germain's Machine d'Argent*, The J. Paul Getty Museum at the Getty Center (Los Angeles) July 11, 2006-March 25, 2007.

*Wild Boars and Peaches: A Reunion of Two French 18th-century Artists*, Nationalmuseum (Stockholm) May 4, 2007-January 6, 2008 (82.DG.12.1 only).

*The Edible Monument: The Art of Food for Festivals*, The Getty Research Institute at the Getty Center (Los Angeles) October 13, 2015-March 13, 2016 (82.DG.12.1 only).

*Sfida al Barocco Roma, Torino, Parigi 1680-1750*, Cintroniera Juvarriana della Venaria Reale (Turin) May 30-September 20, 2020 (no. 128, 82.DG.12.1 only).

## Bibliography

{{Lisbon 1934}}, 64-65, 80-83, nos. 230-231 “Duas Terrinas,” ill. pl. 75 (lent by Ex.ma Sr.a D. Thereza Lobo de Almeida de Melo e Castro de Vilhena); {{Paris 1954}}, 90-91, no. 453 (lent by Mme. T. de Melo de Castro de Vilhena \[Galveias\]); {{Frégnac 1965}}, 121; {{Alcouffe 1974}} in {{Paris 1974}}, 358, no. 484; {{*Important European Silver* 1975}}, 74-75, lot 230 A and B, “A Pair of Magnificent Louis XV Jardinieres and Stands/Magnifique Paire de Jardinieres dite ‘aux sangliers’ et leur presentoirs”; {{Milnes-Gaskell 1976}}, 220-25; {{Wilson 1983b}} in {{ Wilson, Sassoon, and Bremer-David 1983}}, 24-28, no. 3; {{Sassoon and Wilson 1986}}, 66-67, no. 148; {{New York 1987}}, no. 53; {{*French Silver* 1988}}, 2, 7-8, fig. 4; {{Pons 1990}}, 132, 136, 152n23, 153n50; {{D'Orey 1991}}, 24-25; {{[Bremer-David et al. 1993}}, 111-12, no. 186;](http://www.getty.edu/publications/virtuallibrary/0892362219.html) {{Perrin 1993}}, 58, 96-97, 268nn146-147, 275n69; {{[Wilson and Hess 2001}}, 94-95, no. 192; {{Lisbon 2005}},](http://www.getty.edu/publications/virtuallibrary/089236632X.html) 102-103, cat. no. 27; 327, cat. no. 27 note 3; 132-33, and 327, cat. no. 40 note 3; {{New York 2005}}, 177, 178n2; {{Ahlund and Skogh 2007}}, 73-74; {{Seelig 2007}}, 185n142; {{Wilson et al. 2008}}, 373, fig. 18; {{Bremer-David 2015}} in {{Los Angeles 2015}}, 124-47, fig. 8; {{Boiron 2019}} in {{*Tureen "Aux Ecrevisses"* 2019}}, 44-60; {{Magalhães 2019}} in {{*Tureen "Aux Ecrevisses"* 2019}}, 73; {{Ward 2019}} in {{*Tureen "Aux Ecrevisses"* 2019}}, 24; {{Vassallo e Silva 2019}} in {{*Tureen "Aux Ecrevisses"* 2019}}, 68; {{Fuhring 2020}} in {{Turin 2020}}, 387-88, no. 128 (82.DG.12.1 only).

\[NB: link this entry to maker bio 7 - Thomas Germain - and to maker bio 6 - François Thomas Germain\]

##  Notes

[^1]: Despite its appearance, Luis Keil identified the coronet, however, as that of a marquess. {{Keil 1934}} in {{Lisbon 1934}}, 64, nos. 230-31 “Duas Terrinas.”

[^2]: Per the technical report dated October 13, 2021 by Julie Wolfe, Decorative Arts and Sculpture Conservation, J. Paul Getty Museum, traces of three obliterated marks are discernible in a detail from an x-radiograph through the bottom of the vessel, 82.DG.12.1.b. These marks were hidden when a subsequent application of solder covered targeted areas of the bottom surface, near the center punch points, and also filled the original chasing work. One mark was located at the center punch point and two others were in the vicinity of the legible crowned "K" (the Paris warden's mark used between August 13, 1726, and August 13, 1727). Two center punch points, one in the interior of the vessel and the other on its exterior, are visible in the x-radiograph. The top and bottom center punch points did not perfectly align and are adjacent to each other. The purpose of the center punch point was to guide the goldsmith’s raising hammer as he shaped the vessel from a flat sheet and controlled the thickness of its walls. See also entry 1 in this catalogue, note 39.

    The x-radiograph was captured at 350 kV, 10mA, 1000mSec, and 96 inches with a GE x-radiography system with digital detector array, and was annotated by Julie Wolfe, Decorative Arts and Sculpture Conservation, J. Paul Getty Museum, to show the contour outlines of the obliterated marks.

[^3]: According to the historic numeral and scratch weight, in the old French units of *marc*, *once*, and *gros*, on this tureen (82.DG.12.1.b), the original component parts of “N^o^ 2” all together equated to 11847.574 grams. Normally, such a scratch weight would have tallied together the four component parts of one pair: lid (now lost), liner, tureen, and stand plus, possibly, the two corresponding serving spoons. However, the lid for this tureen no longer exists and its stand (82.DG.12.1.c) originally belonged to the pair (82.DG.12.2). The stands of the pairs were interchanged at an unknown date, perhaps when acquired by the Museum. The current overall weight of this pair 82.DG.12.1.a-c, with its three parts, is 8620 grams.

    A report by Arlen Heginbotham, in Decorative Arts and Sculpture Conservation, J. Paul Getty Museum, recorded the type of scale used to weigh these objects on August 4, 2017. It was an A & D Weighing scale, model SK-2KWPZ, serial number P165348, with a capacity of 20 kg that reads to the nearest 0.01 kg (10 g). It was calibrated on July 19, 2017 and was accurate to within 0.01 kg over the range of 0-20 kg.

[^4]: The historic scratch weight, in the old French units of *marc*, *once*, and *gros*, on this stand (82.DG.12.1.c) equates to 11778.738 grams which clearly tabulated more parts of the original pair “N^o^ 1” than the stand alone, whose weight is 3230 grams.

[^5]: The scratch weight, in the old French units of *marc*, *once*, and *gros*, on this tureen (82.DG.12.2.b) equates to 11786.386 grams, suggesting the tally of the original parts of “N^o^ 1” combined the weights of the (now lost) lid, liner, tureen, and stand plus, possibly, the two corresponding serving spoons. However, the lid for this tureen no longer exists and its stand (82.DG.12.2.c) originally belonged to the pair (82.DG.12.1). The stands of the pairs were interchanged at an unknown date, perhaps when acquired by the Museum. The current overall weight of this pair 82.DG.12.2.a-c, with its three parts, is 8720 grams. See note 3 above.

[^6]: The historic scratch weight, in the old French units of *marc*, *once*, and *gros*, on this stand (82.DG.12.2.c) equates to 11901.114 grams which clearly tabulated more parts of the original pair “n^o^ 2” than the stand alone, whose weight is 3320 grams. See note 4 above.

[^7]: Information concerning the process of making of the tureens is based upon the technical analysis of Julie Wolfe, Decorative Arts and Sculpture Conservation, J. Paul Getty Museum, and upon her interpretation of a composite x-radiograph of one tureen (82.DG.12.1.b) that was captured at 350 kV, 10mA, 1000mSec, and 96 inches with a GE x-radiography system with digital detector array.

[^8]: The following excerpt quotes from the technical report dated October 13, 2021 by Julie Wolfe, Decorative Arts and Sculpture Conservation, J. Paul Getty Museum. “The body of the tureen \[82.DG.12.1.b\] was raised from sheet metal and first scalloped by repoussé followed by chasing the exterior surface to create the hair pattern. The raised bowl ended 3.5 cm from the finished rim where another raised and chased band was soldered concave to the lower body. The banded reed molding was cast and soldered onto the entire perimeter.”

[^9]: This excerpt quotes from the technical report dated October 13, 2021 by Julie Wolfe, Decorative Arts and Sculpture Conservation, J. Paul Getty Museum. “The boar head and neck were hollow cast and soldered to the \[vessel, 82.DG.12.1.b\]. Since the back of the boar head where it extends above the rim would have been exposed, a raised scallop section was soldered onto the interior of the \[vessel\] and covers the back of the boar's head. In other words, the boar head and scalloped backing sandwich the rim of the \[vessel\]. The chest and burnished scrolls on either side of the boar are cast together and attached with pins and solder. The boar's hoof is cast hollow and soldered onto the base.”

[^10]: This excerpt quotes from the technical report dated October 13, 2021 by Julie Wolfe, Decorative Arts and Sculpture Conservation, J. Paul Getty Museum. “The cartouche and volute foot elements are composed of three or four cast parts soldered together. The bottom 3 cm of the foot is hollow and joins the mid-section that curves onto the bottom of the \[vessel, 82.DG.12.1.b\] and extends over the sides to make the cartouche. Pins were used to hold this section during soldering. After assembly, the bottom of this middle volute section was chased to blend in with the hair texture on the bottom \[of the vessel\]. The original shield was removed and the existing one has been soldered in place. It appears that the coronet is a separate element soldered to the frame of the cartouche.”

[^11]: The estimated weights of the lost lids were deduced from the historic scratch weights inscribed on the tureens, per notes 3 and 5 above. Luis Keil surmised the lids were lost when the Portuguese court fled in exile to Brazil, 1808 to 1821, rather than during the 1807 occupation of Portugal by French troops. Every inventory after 1796 of the Melo e Castro family, as the condes das Galveias, identified the lidless tureens as jardinieres or flower boxes (*jardineiras* or *floreiras*). {{Keil 1934}} in {{Lisbon 1934}}, 82. Indeed, the vessels were still called jardinieres when sold {{*Important European Silver* 1975}}, 74-75, lot 230 A and B, “A Pair of Magnificent Louis XV Jardinieres and Stands/Magnifique Paire de Jardinieres dite ‘aux sangliers’ et leur presentoirs.” The overall historic weights of each original pair are somewhat less than an extant comparable - yet heavier - example of a close model, also by Thomas Germain, that retains its original lid, and whose overall weight is 14432 grams. This example is now in the Detroit Institute of Arts, 59.18.a-d, Founders Society Purchase, Elizabeth Parke Firestone Collection of Early French Silver Fund. {{Albainy 1999}}, 11-12, 21, no. 3. \[<https://www.jstor.org/stable/23182660>\] See fig 3.3 and note 24 below.

[^12]: {{Bremer-David 2015}} in {{Los Angeles 2015}}, 124-47, fig. 8.

[^13]: See, for example, two designs for tureens with handles by Thomas Germain in {{Lisbon 2005}}, 102-03 and 327, no. 27 note 3; 132-33 and 327, no. 40 note 3.

[^14]: {{Pons 1990}}, 132, 136, 152n23, 153n50.

[^15]: The toilette service is known by description only as it does not survive. {{Bapst 1887}}, 39-44. \[ <https://hdl.handle.net/2027/gri.ark:/13960/t6d26sh2b> \] {{Perrin 1993}}, 37, 263n19.

[^16]: The tureens were described in the posthumous inventory of Samuel Jacques Bernard as “*Vaisselle d’argent. N^o^ 802: Deux grandes terrines portées par des sangliers. Sur les couvercles sont différents animaux et fruits. Deux grandes plats ovales à contours cizelés servant aux terrines. Deux grandes cuillers pour icelles*….” Paris, Archives nationales de France, Minutier central, LXXXVIII, 629, August 13, 1753. Relevant pages were produced in {{Boiron 2019}} in {{*Tureen “Aux Ecrevisses”* 2019}}, 54-55 and transcribed in {{Perrin 1993}}, 268n146.

[^17]: Luis Keil paraphrased their description in the posthumous inventory of Martinho de Melo e Castro, dated September 14, 1796, as “…*as tampas tinham como remate, una alcachofra emu ma delas, e na outra uma couve flor, e todas eram ornamentadas com aves, mariscos e camarões*.” \[“…the lids were topped with an artichoke on one of them, and on the other a cauliflower, and all were decorated with birds, seafood and shrimp \[sic\]” (meaning crayfish).\] Private Arquivo Casa Calveias, box 13. {{Keil 1934}} in {{Lisbon 1934}}, 64-65, nos. 230-31 “Duas Terrinas,” 80-83. See also {{Magalhães 2019}} in {{*Tureen “Aux Ecrevisses”* 2019}}, 75.

[^18]: {{Pons 1990}}, 132, 136, 152n24.

[^19]: The object is now in the Museu Nacional de Arte Antiga, Lisbon, inv. 1827 Our. {{D’Orey 1991}}, 68-81, 194 no. 2. {{D’Orey 1993-94}} in {{Versailles 1993-94}}, 303-05, no. 145. The widow of Thomas Germain was personally involved in the payment settlement eventually reached in 1757 with the estate of Samuel Jacques Bernard. {{Boiron 2019}} in {{*Tureen “Aux Ecrevisses”* 2019}}, 53, 57-58, 60nn33-44. {{Perrin 1993}}, 56, 82, 85, 268n142.

[^20]: The paneling is now installed in the Israel Museum, Jerusalem, gift of Baron Edmond and Baroness Nadine de Rothschild, Paris. \[ <https://www.imj.org.il/en/collections/202145> (accessed 2020-04-22)\] For a summary of the aggrandizement of the hotel at 46 rue de Bac and a period floor plan indicating the new grand salon and gallery, see {{Boiron 2019}} in {{*Tureen “Aux Ecrevisses”* 2019}}, 44-60. On the relationship between Jean-Baptiste Oudry and the Germain workshop, see entry 8 in this catalogue.

[^21]: These paintings, in their original frames, now hang in the Palais Rohan, Strasbourg; they form part of the collections of the Musée des Beaux-Arts, Strasbourg, inv. 1668. {{Paris 1982}}, 208-10 no. 113, “Panneau décoratif avec chiens, oiseaux exotiques, instruments de musique et motifs architecturaux dans un paysage.” {{Pons 1990}}, 129, fig. 170; 131, fig. 169; 132; 152n20. {{Martin and Walter 2012}}, 120-21.

[^22]: These vessels survive in private collections. Until the first decades of the nineteenth century, they shared a common provenance with the boar head tureens. {{*Tureen “Aux Ecrevisses”* 2019}}, 32-43, lot 690, “A Louis XV Silver Pot-à-Oille, Cover, Liner, and Stand, Thomas Germain, Paris, 1740-42, The Arms Changed by his Son François-Thomas Germain c. 1764.” {{Magalhães 2019}} in {{*Tureen “Aux Ecrevisses”* 2019}}, 75.

[^23]: Vincent La Chapelle, *Le cuisinier moderne* (The Hague: L’auteur, 1742), vol. 6, loose plate, *Table de quinze ou seize Couverts* (“Table with fifteen or sixteen Place Settings”). The Schlesinger Library, Radcliffe Institute, Harvard University, Cambridge, 641.64 L13cv.6_table. \[<http://id.lib.harvard.edu/images/olvwork372452/catalog> (accessed 2020-04-22)\]

[^24]: One of the pair is in the Detroit Institute of Arts, inv. 59.18.a-d, Founders Society Purchase, Elizabeth Parke Firestone Collection of Early French Silver Fund. \[<https://www.dia.org/art/collection/object/tureen-lid-liner-and-stand-45774> (accessed 2020-04-16)\] {{Perrin 1993}}, 58-59. The other is in a private collection. {{*French Royal Silver* 1996}}*,* 58-64, lot 3, “Penthièvre-Orléans Service. A Louis XV Royal Silver Tureen, Cover, Liner and Stand, Thomas Germain, Paris, 1733-34.” The provenance of this pair warrants further investigation. Henry Janssen, who from 1738 rented the Hôtel de Lassay, located at 140 rue du Bac, is thought to have been the original owner before they passed into the possession of the comte d’Eu and then the duc de Penthièvre, as succinctly summarized in {{*Treasures* 2016}}, 132-41, lot 25, “A French Royal Silver Tureen and Cover form the Penthièvre-Orléans Service, The Cover, Antoine Sebastien Durant, Paris 1752-1753, The Tureen, Jean-Baptiste Claude Odiot, Paris, Circa 1821.” Based on the fact that the heraldic symbols of the Janssen family, swans and reeds, were applied to the pre-existing cartouches on the stand, Michèle Bimbenet-Privat believes, however, Janssen purchased the pair of tureens from François Thomas Germain, after having been in the possession of d’Eu and Penthièvre. Information courtesy of a communication from Michèle Bimbenet-Privat, August 2021. Either this pair, or yet a third pair of boar head tureens, was in the possession of François Joly de Fleury, a *fermier général*, and then count Brühl, the Saxon minister in Dresden. See {{Cassidy-Geiger 2007}}, 123-52.

[^25]: The painting is now in the Nationalmuseum, Stockholm, inv. MN 800. {{Faroult 2020}} in {{Turin 2020}}, 388-89, no. 129. {{Ahlund and Skogh 2007}}, 73-74. {{Lastic and Jacky 2010}}, vol. 2, 227-28, no. P817. On the relationship between Germain and Desportes, see {{Paris 1982-83}}.

[^26]: {{Perrin 1993}}, 58, 97-98, 268nn146, 147, 275n69. Regarding the change of armorials, see note 10 above.

[^27]: {{Pons 1990}}, 153nn49-50. {{D’Orey 1991}}, 24-25. {{Boiron 2019}} in {{*Tureen “Aux Ecrevisses”* 2019}}, 53-58.

[^28]: {{Magalhães 2019} in {{*Tureen “Aux Ecrevisses”* 2019}}, 71-72, 75. See note 17 above.

[^29]: The drawings are in private collections. {{Lisbon 2005}}, 102-03 and 327, no. 27 note 3; 132-33 and 327, no. 40 note 3. Access to one drawing was kindly facilitated by the collector and Peter Fuhring.

[^30]: Sotheby Parke Bernet Monaco S.A., Monte Carlo. *Dessins et Tableaux*. November 26, 1975, lot 583 “Attribué à Thomas Germain, Projet de Soupieres.”

[^31]: *N.9* *Etat générale des Modeles en Cuivre et Etain Concernent l’Orfèvrerie*: *\[No\] 4 Pour M. de Janssin plombe 4 pieds de sanglier, 2 tete de sanglier, 1 noued du bout de couvercle, 1 anse de doublure, Le Bouquet au dessus le couvercle et dans la boëtes aux legumes.* *\[No\] 30 attributes d’armes, chiffres…et different Ecussons: Grouppes de Branches et palms et un aigle, attributes d’armes Mello. 3 plombes.*” The inventory also counted eight models for different and various tureens. Archives Nationales de France, Minutier central, LXXXIII, 511, May 22, 1765. *Délivrance de mobilier par François Thomas Germain, sculpteur orfèvre du roi.* Images of the document were kindly shared by Peter Fuhring.

[^32]: The tureens were valued at 645\$443 *réis* and the stands at 236\$310 *réis* in 1795. {{Magalhães 2019}} in {{*Tureen “Aux Ecrevisses”* 2019}}, 75.

[^33]: {{*Important European Silver* 1975}}, 74-75, lot 230 A and B, “A Pair of Magnificent Louis XV Jardinieres and Stands/Magnifique Paire de Jardinieres dite ‘aux sangliers’ et leur presentoirs.” {{Magalhães 2019}} in {{*Tureen “Aux Ecrevisses”* 2019}}, 75. Concerning the historical context which brought these tureens to auction in 1975, see Rato, Vanessa. “O magnifica leilão do PREC em Genebra.” *Série Portugal em Fuga (II)*. In *Público, Edição Lisboa* XXX, no. 10.882 (February 9, 2020): 18-23. \[ <https://gulbenkian.pt/investigacao-jornalistica/vanessa-rato/> \]
